# scRNA-seq
Computational Approaches for Upstream and Downstream Analyses of scRNA-seq Data with Special Reference to H5N1 Infection in Cattle
# ABSTRACT
The bovine mammary gland is a specialized organ in dairy animals that is responsible for milk production. Recent outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAIV) H5N1 infection raised severe health problems in dairy cattle in the United States. This virus infects the bovine mammary gland and is found in milk. Through milk, this infection spreads among humans posing a great concern for public health. The molecular mechanism of H5N1 infection in cattle is still largely unknown. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is one of the best technologies nowadays, which has been used to study the cellular dynamics, molecular events during disease at the unprecedented single-cell resolution. It is widely used in the field of immunology, cancer research, developmental biology, neuroscience and various other fields to analyze gene expression at the individual cell level. However, there are limited studies on H5N1 in cattle using scRNA-seq. Further, there are limited scRNA-seq computational protocols available in the literature for zoonotic pathogens including HPAIV to understand the host infection at cellular and molecular-levels. Thus, this study was conducted to get insights into the cellular and molecular mechanisms of H5N1 infection in cattle. To address this problem, a structured computational protocol involving up and downstream analyses was developed, which can help researchers to analyze the scRNA-seq data effectively and efficiently to get important biological insights at the single-cell. This protocol was applied to study the cellular mechanisms underlying H5N1 infection in cattle using a very recent scRNA-seq dataset. The used dataset is available in the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) database of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) and consists of 8 samples, 4 related to uninfected and 4 related to infected female cattle with the H5N1 infection. Altogether, the dataset consists of 7113 cells and 32626 genes. After quality filtration, there are 11622 genes and 4030 cells in the dataset. In this study, upstream and downstream analysis of scRNA-seq data was performed. Upstream analysis shows that there are 15 distinct cell groups. After cell annotation, 10 different categories of cell types related to 15 clusters were obtained. These cell groups include 1 cluster related to Neutrophil cells, 3 MKI67+ natural killer cells, 2 Monocyte cells, 2 DEFB4A+ Macrophage cells, 2 CD4-CD8-T cells, 1 Macrophage I cells, 1 CCL11+ Myofibroblast cells, 1 Hepatocyte cells, 1 Natural killer cells and 1 Pit cells. Differential Expression (DE) Analysis performed on the dataset identified 67 genes exhibiting downregulation and 1327 genes showing upregulation. The network inference of these DE genes results in 349 and 77 hub genes in the uninfected-H5N1 infected gene regulatory networks. The pathway and ontology analysis of the DE and hub genes revealed their involvement in key pathways and biological processes. These biological insights would help the researchers to understand the host-virus interaction at the cellular and molecular-level

## Keywords: scRNA-seq, Cattle, H5N1, Upstream, Downstream, Differential Expression, Gene Network, Hub genes
